---
title: "Workload Dynamics in Safety-Critical Monitoring Roles: Evidence from the Belgian Railway Network"
collection: publications
category: "manuscript"
permalink: /publication/2025-03-paper5
venue: 'SSRN Electronic Journal'
date: 2024-10-11
paperurl: 'https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4798034'
citation: 'Liu, Ning-Yuan Georgia and Triantis, Konstantinos and Roets, Bart, Workload Dynamics in Safety-Critical Monitoring Roles: Evidence from the Belgian Railway Network. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4798034 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4798034'
---
The increasing reliance on automation has significantly altered the nature of human workload, particularly shifting the emphasis from active operation to passive monitoring role in transportation systems. This shift has led to a profound impact on mental fatigue, resulting from high levels of stress or boredom during monitoring tasks that escalate the risk of human errors and, consequently, accidents. Determining and quantifying an optimal workload level that maximizes operator performance presents a formidable challenge. This paper proposes a dynamic simulation model of workload and its impact on fatigue for safety-critical monitoring roles in railway transportation. Leveraging existing theoretical frameworks and literature on workload suboptimality, we initially constructed a quantitative System Dynamics (SD) model. This model is then rigorously tested and calibrated using real-world operational data from traffic controllers employed by the National Belgian Railway Infrastructure Company. The results effectively demonstrated the model’s capability of capturing the dynamics of workload distribution and mental fatigue over time. The results point to: 1) the support of operational data in the formulation of the feedback mechanism between an operator’s workload and mental fatigue; 2) the delineation and quantification of a workload “comfort zone” when fatigue accumulation becomes more pronounced; and 3) the dynamics associated with the overload and underload thresholds, where increased fatigue levels lead to a shrinkage of the “comfort zone.” Our proposed simulation model emerges as a potential approach for practitioners to assess the probability of human errors based on specific workload distributions. Beyond its immediate utility, the model also offers strategic insights for policy-making and schedule planning aimed at enhancing operator performance and ensuring safety in transportation systems.

